---
title: A note on conference prep
tags: other
excerpt:
  Some thoughts on how I prep for conferences. It's a 5-week process I've been
  tweaking over time. Not saying it's the ultimate guide, but it's been working
  for me. Maybe it'll help someone else out there too. Dive in if you're
  curious!
date: 2023-08-17
# featured: true
---

Here's a post that no one asked for, but I wrote it anyway.

I've been trying to get better at preparing talks and presentations. I think
I've finally figured out a method that keeps me organized and helps me feel
confident in my progress and presentations. It's _not_ the ultimate guide, but
it's been working for me. Maybe it'll help someone else out there too.

I typically begin five weeks in advance when preparing for a new talk. The exact
timeline may vary depending on the topic and if I have other presentations to
prepare at the same time. Or other bigger projects to attend (like a vacation
üèñ). Though, I try to stick to these five weeks as my process has five stages:
research, content, narration, slides, dry runs. I try to reserve one week per
each. I do this to make sure I always find the time, which sometimes that can be
difficult considering I prepare most of the talks in my free time, and try to
have a social live outside of work. In reality I work approx 8 hours/week per
talk.

I use FigJam extensively. I use it to brain dump all my notes and thoughs, as
well as figuring out the narration of my presentation. I also use it to
visualize _deadlines_ üëá

![](https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/assets/9019397/97fc37b8-7d2e-49d7-8d0d-93dad4987713)

### Research

If I have more time, I spend more than a week on research. It's the creative
part, so sometimes it doesn't really feel like work. It's also difficlut to
estimate how much time it takes, as it's very unstructured time when I have the
freedom to go into different directions and play with ideas. It consists of the
following:

- _Just_ thinking
- Talking to people
- Playing with projects/tools
- **Tons** of reading
- **Tons** of googling
- More thinking
- More talking to people

Once I'm done, my FigJam looks like this:

![](https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/assets/9019397/02f7a467-6df8-46fc-addd-8dae0264bf79)

### Content

For that part I reserve one week which usually boils down to 4-20 hours
depending on the talk. I gather everything from the research step and try to
combine it into something that makes sense. I filter all my notes and collect
what I can actually use (disclaimer: it's usually 5% of everything I came up
with during the research phase). If I need to create a demo app, that's the
time. It's time to ensure that everything I want to show is ready.

My FigJam is usually more organized after this stage:

![](https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/assets/9019397/b22f108a-08bd-405e-9111-088fe6366525)

### Narration

Again ‚Äî one week and usually 4-8 hours. writing the script. Usually 4-8 hours.
Writing. Figuring out the flow. Sometimes some adjustments to the content. I
keep rearranging cards in Figma into something that makes sense. Then I go over
it, and if that doesn't make sense, I mix again. And again. Until I'm happy or
until I face the hypothetical deadline I put upon myself. I keep the narration
flow in FigJam, but I write the script in a Word document.

Here are some examples:

![](https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/assets/9019397/8675ef55-6c7c-4ab7-9122-e44f23f44b95)

### Slides.

One week, ‚àû hours (as there's always something to improve but also, I love this
part). Once narration is ready and I know what to say, I can make slides **out
of narration**. That's important. Not the other way around. If I start with
slides, I'd either rely on them too much or would need to redo them from scratch
after writing the script. Slides are the addition, not the central part. Slides
should enhance this narrative, not dictate it. I'll keep repeating that ‚Äî
**don't do slides before narration**. And believe me, I stared with slides many
times in the past, and every single time I was highly frustrated and unsatisfied
with my talks afterwards.

### Dry runs

I usually start a few days before the talk and very often this phase overlaps
with the previous one. Though, I didn't master that one yet. I always tell
myself I'll do many of them, but I end up with 2-3 at most. My goal is to do one
per day one week before the conference.

---

Of course, it could be better, and I usually procrastinate, push deadlines, etc.
But this process lets me make sure I actually deliver the talk, and what's
important, **I worry about one thing at a time**. That's a lot of stress that
you can minimise. I don't have to think about slides for the first few weeks.
Similarly, I don't worry about the narration or the flow during the first
phases. And when I'm doing the narration, I don't worry about the content
because that phase is done. It used to be quite overwhelming for me to focus on
everything at once. Knowing that you have a dedicated time to stress about a
particular thing, can make the present way more enjoyable.

### Further reading

If I could recommend one book to read to improve the conference skills and the
preparation process, it would be
[Resonate: Present Visual Stories that Transform Audiences](https://www.goodreads.com/en/book/show/7970507)
by [Nancy Duarte](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nancy_Duarte).
